1 
 
Intro 
 
A. Are you the type that likes to hold onto things or the type who 
throws stuff out? 
1. You more of a hoarder or a minimalist? 
2. One thing is certain, the Amazon boxes keep showing up to your 
doorstep, so if you don’t do something, you’re life is only going to 
get more and more cluttered. 
B. I came across a book entitled: For Packrats only: How to Clean 
Up, Clear Out, and Dejunk Your Life Forever 
1. Now, this is the kind of book that appeals to me. I’m not a packrat. 
I’m definitely more of a minimalist. If I haven’t used something 
for a while, I love throwing it away. It gives me joy to throw it 
away and make my life more simple.  
2. So I would love to clean up, clear out, and dejunk my life forever.  
3. And what sounds most appealing is the word forever. To have all 
my stuff organized and neat and simple for the rest of my life. That 
would be nice! 
a. Because it seems like clutter just so naturally happens. Seems 
like every week, I’m cleaning junk off of my desk, I’m clearing 
out random trash from my car.  
b. It’d be nice to Dejunk my life forever. 
C. But what sounds infinitely better, infinitely more appealing to 
me is a Christian is not de-junking my spiritual life.  
1. What if you could clean up, clear out, and de-sin your life forever? 
2. Is that possible? Cuz that would be really, really nice. 
a. In our study of Romans, chapter 6 has made us 
think....hm...maybe it is possible! Maybe it is possible to de-sin 
ourselves for the rest of our lives. 
i. Because Romans 6 uses strong language like “we’re dead to 
sin,” like “we’re set free from sin.” 2 
 
ii. But then we come to Romans 7...which brings back down to 
earth. It gives us a realistic view of what life as a Christian is 
like. 
b. Even though we are dead to sin, and set free from sin...even 
though sin is no longer our slave master, even though we now 
have the power to say “no to sin,” we will still struggle with sin. 
In fact, chapter 7 paints a picture of an all-out war against sin. 
D. Turn to Rom. 7 
1. Will study verses 20-25 today. 
2. Last week, we went over verses 14-19, and we’ll re-read those 
verses because together these two passages make up on section, 
one unit of Paul’s thought.  
 
Romans 7:14–25 (ESV)  
14
 For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am of the flesh, sold 
under sin. 
15
 For I do not understand my own actions. For I do not do 
what I want, but I do the very thing I hate. 
16
 Now if I do what I do not 
want, I agree with the law, that it is good. 
17
 So now it is no longer I 
who do it, but sin that dwells within me. 
18
 For I know that nothing 
good dwells in me, that is, in my flesh. For I have the desire to do what 
is right, but not the ability to carry it out. 
19
 For I do not do the good I 
want, but the evil I do not want is what I keep on doing.  
 
20
 Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I who do it, but sin 
that dwells within me. 
21
 So I find it to be a law that when I want to do 
right, evil lies close at hand. 
22
 For I delight in the law of God, in my 
inner being, 
23
 but I see in my members another law waging war against 
the law of my mind and making me captive to the law of sin that dwells 
in my members. 
24
 Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from 
this body of death? 
25
 Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! 3 
 
So then, I myself serve the law of God with my mind, but with my 
flesh I serve the law of sin.  
 
A. This passage is...humbling. It reminds us that this battle with sin 
is lifelong. That as much as we try to clean up and de-sin our lives, 
we simply can’t do so completely. 
B. Although...that’s not what some people believe. 
1. There are some branches of certain denominations that believe in 
what they will call “entire sanctification” or “Christian perfection” 
or simply “perfectionism.”  
a. These Christians believe that it is possible to attain a state where 
you no longer sin, or at least you no longer willfully sin. You 
achieve this state of perfect holiness and perfect love...often 
through some second act of the Holy Spirit or second baptism of 
the Holy Spirit after getting saved. 
C. I actually met someone like this about 10 years ago at my old 
church in LA. 
1. I was teaching a night class on systematic theology. And after class 
was dismissed there was a guy, bigger than me and taller than me. 
And when he approached me after class, I could tell, he was mad. 
2. And he went on to passionately tell me that my teaching on 
sanctification was heretical because I said that no one can be 
perfect in this life. He said we can be perfect. We can be sinless, 
and he went on to tell me that he himself had not sinned in 19 
years! 
3. The more I tried to talk to him, the more angry he got. I remember 
he got really close to my face, definitely invaded my personal 
space. I remember looking up into his eyes which were bloodshot 
and very scary. He raised his voice so much at me, that a security 
guard heard him, and came over so much eventually escorted him 4 
 
away. So anger, strife, disunity.... I guess I witnessed this guy 
break his 19-year streak! 
D. As amazing as it would be to not sin again in this life, our passage 
today teaches the opposite. Even the great Apostle Paul still struggled 
with sin...and so will we.  
 
Background 
 
A. Now before we jump into our text, we need to put one key word 
under the microscope. Because if we don’t, this passage will make 
very little sense. It’s a word that appears 7 times in just 6 verses, and 
it is the word “law.” 
B. Paul uses this word two different ways. 
1. The first way he uses it, he mean a set of rules, specifically, God’s 
rules that he gives in the Old Testament, often called the Law of 
Moses or the Mosaic Law. 
a. That’s how Paul uses the word “law” in this 
passage....sometimes.  
b. But if you try to use this definition for all 7 times you see the 
word “law,” it doesn’t work.  
i. For example, v. 21. Let’s try it. 
 
21
 So I find it to be a [Mosaic Law] that when I want to do right, evil 
lies close at hand. 
 
That doesn’t work! 
 
2. So there are sometimes in this passage where Paul is using the 
same word “law” but he means something else. 
a. He means a principle, a norm, or a reality.  5 
 
b. We use the word “law” this way too. One of the most common 
ways we use it: we talk about the law of gravity. 
i. What we mean is there is a principle, a norm with how gravity 
works. 
(a) When you drop something, it falls to the ground. 
(b) Now, if you want a more technical understanding of 
gravity, you can google all about Isaac Newton. 
ii. But for our basic, layman discussion here, we know that the 
law, the norm, the reality is that when you drop something, it 
goes down.  
C. So sometimes when Paul uses the word Law, he means the set of 
Old Testament rules, but sometimes, he means a principle, a norm, a 
reality.  
 
Ok, with that on our radar, now we can get into the text. As we’ve said, 
Paul has painted the picture of a struggle, a war. And it begins by 
introducing to us our enemy in verses 20-21.  
 
#1 The Enemy (20-21) 
 
Romans 7:20–21 (ESV)  
20
 Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I who do it, but sin 
that dwells within me. 
21
 So I find it to be a law that when I want to 
do right, evil lies close at hand.  
 
A. Our enemy’s name is sin.  
a. But this passage doesn’t want us to think of this enemy as outside 
of us. He is within.  
b. In fact, this passage doesn’t want us to think of this enemy as 
separate from us, it wants us to think of the enemy as a part of us. 
B. Paul is saying there are two parts to me, but both parts are me. 6 
 
a. There’s one part that he simply calls “I.” That is the new I, the I 
that has been born again, saved, justified...the I that loves God and 
wants to please God. 
b. But then there’s the second part of me. It’s sin. It’s this sin nature 
that has a tendency, a bent toward sin. 
C. Now v. 20 might initially sound like Paul is distancing himself 
from his sin.  
 
Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I who do it, but sin that 
dwells within me. 
 
1. Is Paul distancing himself from his sin? Is he saying, “Hey it’s not 
me doing it! It’s the sin!” I’m innocent! It’s that nasty sin in me, 
that’s the problem! 
a. Well, if a police officer pulls you over, is it going to get you off 
the hook to say, “Officer, it was not I who was doing 90 in a 65 
zone, but sin that dwells within me.” 
b. If a teacher disciplines a child for misbehaving during recess, 
does it work for that kid to say, “Teacher, it was not I who threw 
that rock at Jonny, but sin that dwells within me.” 
B. No, the sin is a part of you! It’s you. There is a side of you, a real 
side of you that desires to sin and commits sin. 
C. During WWII, there was a United States Colonel named Reuben 
Tucker who ordered an invasion of Sicily in Italy. 
1. One day earlier, the American soliders had landed 170,000 troops 
in Sicily, and now they had a solid foothold in the city. 
2. So the next day, Colonel Tucker ordered 2,000 paratroopers to join 
their fellow American soldiers behind enemy lines. 
D. This invasion consisted of 144 planes flying over Sicily to drop the 
paratroopers during a time when they thought that Italian forces 
wouldn’t notice them. 7 
 
1. However, the entire campaign was a disaster. 
a. 23 planes were shot down and 37 more were damaged. 
b. There were 318 total casualties. Paratroopers falling from the 
sky were being shot mid-air.  
2. It was a disaster for American troops! 
3. Under intense fire, colonel Tucker himself parachuted out of a 
plane. He was lucky enough to land safely.  
a. And as soon as he landed. He did something unexpected. He 
took off his helmet and began banging it against a tank. Just 
kept banging it . 
b. His soldiers were confused. They yelled at him to put his helmet 
back on, but he just kept banging it against the tank until the 
gunfire stopped. 
4. Eventually, the shotting stopped...the smoke cleared. And the 
surviving paratroopers now on the ground look to their 
attackers...looked out to those who were shooting them...and saw 
American soldiers. 
a. American soldiers were shooting at American soldiers. 
b. Colonel Tucker was banging his helmet against the tank alerting 
everyone and trying to get the friendly fire to stop, trying to get 
these Americans soldiers to stop firing on their fellow soliders. 
E.  Malfunctioning communication equipment, leading to radio silence 
caused the American troops on the ground to mistaken the American 
planes for German ones. 
1. And so for a moment in WWII, The United States greatest enemy, 
was the United States. 
a. In these opening verses, we see that your greatest enemy 
is...you. 
b. The greatest threat to your spiritual life, the greatest enemy in 
your pursuit of holiness is....you. 8 
 
c. Sure, the world outside of you has problems. It’s broken. Its 
values are oftentimes ungodly. There’s temptation almost 
everywhere you go. But still, the biggest problem is you...the 
biggest obstacle for your spiritual growth is you.  
F. And then in v. 21, we learn that you are not only your worst enemy, 
you are also a life-long enemy.  
 
21 
So I find it to be a law that when I want to do right, evil lies close 
at hand.  
 
1. Here we see Paul use the word “law,” to mean not the Old 
Testament Law, but a principle, a norm, a reality. The second 
definition.  
2. He says, “it’s a principle, it’s the norm that when I do what is right, 
evil lies close at hand!” 
a. He’s describing the norm: whenever I want to do right, sin is 
there, lurking, lying in wait, ready to pounce. 
i. You might think the norm would be if I do something right, 
sin leaves me alone. Sin goes away.  
ii. But he says, “no just the opposite. Even when you obey God, 
even when you have a great moment in your Christian life, sin 
is not far behind.”  
3. He uses this word “law” to convey how consistent this is!  
a. As much as you can count on the law of gravity, you can count 
on this law that sin is following me.  
b. As sure as you can count on when you drop your water bottle, 
it’s going to go crashing onto the ground, you can count on sin 
following you like a shadow.  
G. When you were a kid, did you ever have another kid follow right 
behind you trying to give you a flat tire? That was so annoying, 
right? 9 
 
1. Just walks right behind you and then steps on the back of your 
shoe, makes you trip, maybe even makes your shoe fall off. And 
then he just laughs. 
2. Even before he gives you a flat tire, it’s annoying, right? You can 
feel him behind you. He’s way closer than he should be...and you 
know it’s coming, you can feel it coming, only a matter of time 
before the flat tire comes. 
a. That’s what sin does. It’s always right behind you, and it’s only 
a matter of time before it strikes again. 
b. From the moment you wake up in the morning to the moment 
you knock out at night...sin is there. 
H. So that’s the enemy, He is within you, in fact he is you. And he is 
always around, right at your heels.  
 
Secondly, let’s look at The Battle (22-23) 
 
22 
For I delight in the law of God, in my inner being, 
23 
but I see in my 
members another law waging war against the law of my mind and 
making me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members. 
 
A. In the middle of v. 23, we get battle language: waging war.  
B. V. 22 describes who the enemy is attacking. It’s you. So you are 
attacking you. 
1. The sinful you is attacking the new-you, the redeemed-you, the 
born again-you. 
a. The you that delights in the law of God.  
b. Our new selves love God’s rules because we know they are put 
in place for our good and His glory. They proceed from his heart 
and so we even get to know our God better through his law. 
c. So we echo the Psalmist who says “oh how I love your law!” 
2. We love it, in our inner being, Paul says at the end of the verse. 10 
 
a.  In the deep recesses of who I am, at the very center of my heart, 
who I truly, primarily, and predominantly am, I love God’s law! 
b. In v. 23, he’ll go on to talk about the law of his mind. 
i. His mind is a synonym for his inner being. 
ii. So he says the law of my mind, the norm is that my mind 
desires to honor God. In my mind, I love God’s Law and want 
to obey God. 
c. But...v. 23, in my members, it’s a different story. 
C. Paul uses the word “members” to refer to his physical parts: his 
eyes, ears, mouth, hands, feet, sexual organs.  
1. And Paul says there’s another law that plays out through his body 
parts 
2. This law is the law of v. 21, the law of sin, this principle that sin is 
always lies close hand. This is the principle at work in his body 
parts. 
D. So are you sensing this battle? 
1. The redeemed Paul loves God’s Law, delights in all that God has 
said. 
2. But there’s another side of Paul, a sinful side that takes control of 
his body parts and commits evil with them.  
i. Sometimes the law of sin wins, sometimes the law of my mind 
wins. 
ii. Sometimes I choose to sin with my body parts, sometimes I 
delight in God’s Word and I obey it.  
B. But when the sin wins, it’s not good. It’s not good at all. The 
results are horrible.  
1. End of v. 23: 
 
making me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members.  
 11 
 
2. When sin wins the battle, it doesn’t just quit. It doesn’t say, “yay I 
win. Ok, I’m gonna leave you alone now. Have a nice day. See you 
tomorrow.” 
C. No, when sin wins, he makes me his captive. I become sin’s 
prisoner. 
1. Sin takes my mouth, my ears, my eyes, my hands, and feet, my 
sexual organs make makes them all become his prisoners. 
a. Romans 6 has says that as a Christian, Christ has set me free, 
he’s already paid in full the price of my freedom, he’s already 
paid the punishment, and I’ve already walked out of the prison 
to breathe the free air of grace. 
b. But here, we see sin’s remaining power to call you back to the 
jail cell...and at times, you obey and act like his prisoner all over 
again.  
 
D. Now notice this is a battle that takes place on the inside. This is a 
battle of the mind. A battle of the inner man vs. the inner sin nature.  
1. So this is a battle of desires.  
2. A few years ago, I was introduced to this idea of fighting fire with 
fire, and I found it so helpful in my Christian life. 
a. The desire for sin is certainly a raging fire. It’s strong. It’s 
intense. And a lot of times, to fight sin, what do we do? We try to 
pour water on this fire. 
i. Remind ourselves that sin is wrong, that it’s ugly, that it 
dishonors God, it’s toxic for our souls....so that we desire sin 
less. We lower the intensity of the fire. And that’s good. 
3. But what’s even more effective is fighting fire with fire. 
a. We need another desire, a fire for God that will consume the fire 
for sin. 
b. The thing is, the desire for sin is always going to be there. We 
might try to make it smaller, and we can, but it’s still going to 12 
 
rage on. We need another fire. A bigger fire. An even more 
intense fire. A fire that can consume this one. A fire that can 
trump this one. 
E. In 1819, a Scottish pastor named Thomas charmers wrote a book 
called The Expulsive Power of a New Affection 
1. He’s talking about pushing out our affection for sin with a new 
affection. 
2. This is what he says:  
 
“There are two ways in which a practical moralist may attempt to 
displace from the human heart its love for the world — either by a 
demonstration of the world’s vanity, so that the heart shall be 
prevailed upon simply to withdraw its regards from an object that is 
not worthy of it; or, by setting forth another object, even God, as 
more worthy of its attachment, so that the heart shall be prevailed 
upon not to resign an old affection, which shall have nothing to 
succeed it, but to exchange an old affection for a new one... From the 
constitution of our nature, the former method is altogether 
incompetent and ineffectual, and the latter method will alone suffice 
for the rescue and recovery of the heart from the wrong affection that 
domineers over it.” 
 
3. If you didn’t get all that, Chalmers summarizes what he’s saying in 
this shorter quote. 
 
 “The best way of casting out an impure affection is to admit a pure 
one, and, by the love of what is good, to expel the love of what is 
evil.” 
 13 
 
4. Romans 7 reminds us that we are divided people. We are always 
going to have impure affections and we’re going to have pure 
affections. 
a. So the way to win the battle is to make sure that your pure 
affection, your affection for God is greater. Because that greater 
affection will win out. It will expulse or drive out the weaker 
affection. 
F. Anyone who knows me, knows I have a sweet tooth. I have only 
been on one successful diet in my life. I was 28 years old. My first 
kid, Nathaniel had just been born. And I knew I needed life 
insurance. 
1. So, I was going to get my physical and get my bloodwork done and 
based on how healthy I was, my life insurance company was going 
to assign me a monthly rate for life insurance. The healthier you 
are, the lower you have to pay, and you lock in that rate for life. So 
we’re talking about saving thousands of dollars over the course of 
my life...and I was like, Game on. 
2.  So for the next 4 months before my physical, I dieted and 
exercised like never before. No sweets. No desserts. Cutting carbs, 
and eating a lot of veges. 
a. I take my physical, and I lock in the lowest possible rate! And 
I’m like praise God. Let’s celebrate with some ice cream!  
G. The one time I successfully went on a diet, I fought fire with fire.  
1. I fought my love of desserts with a greater love...a love of saving 
thousands of dollars.  
2. As Romans 7 people, we still have an affection for sin...so we 
need a greater affection for God that will drive out our affection for 
sin. 
3. So the key to winning this battle is not just to starve the affection 
for sin, but to feed the affection for God. 
a. Daily being in his Word and learning about him. 14 
 
b. Daily being in prayer communing with him and letting your 
heart fall in love with him all over each day. 
c. Small Group, fellowship, conversation about God, Christian 
books, singing truth...add fuel to the fire of your affection for 
God. 
H. So that is the battle. It is inward. It is a battle of desires. And as 
we’ll see in verses 24-25, praise God, it is a battle that ends in 
victory. 
 
#3 The Victory (24-25) 
 
Now, before getting to the victory, Paul speaks first from the heat of 
battle. In fact, in v. 24, his exhaustion and frustration reaches a high 
point.  
 
24 
Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from this body of 
death? 
 
A. You can almost see him throw up his hands in frustration! 
1. He calls himself wretched. He’s an unhappy, miserable, anguished!  
2. As he looks into a mirror and he doesn’t like what he sees. He sees 
a divided man, he realizes he cannot stop being this divided man.  
a. Sin follows close at hand, and it’s not going away.  
b. Why? Because he’s trapped in this a body of death. 
B. Sin is at work in his body parts, and this reminds him that sin leads 
to death.  
1. And Paul is seeking rescue from this!  
2. “Will someone come and save me from this sin and death!” 
 
He doesn’t hesitate to answer his own question.  
 15 
 
Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our lord! 
 
C. There it is. There he is. The solution. The rescue! The victory!  
1. It is God...who offers his son Jesus Christ. 
2. It is the Lamb who takes away the sins of the world...by dying as a 
sinless sacrifice for sinners. 
3. But remember we’re in the future tense here. Paul cries out, “Who 
will set me free from this body of death?!” 
a. Yes, Jesus has come to forgive us of our sins. Yes, Jesus has died 
as our substitute to pay the penalty for our sins. But that’s not the 
focus here. 
b. The focus is on the future. The focus is on when Jesus will come 
back a second time...and he’ll make all things right. He’ll come 
saying, “Behold, I make all things new.” And that includes us. It 
includes our bodies. 
i. Sin will no longer dwell in our members 
ii. Sin will no longer follow close at hand 
iii. The law of sin is gone! Defeated. Vanquished. Sin is no 
longer a principle, a norm, or a reality. 
D. We talk about justification, sanctification, and glorification. The 
three stages of our salvation. 
1. We were justified in the past 
2. We are now, currently, as Christians being progressively sanctified. 
3. And in the future, when Christ returns we will be glorified. 
E. Another way to look at it from the perspective of sin. 
1. In Justification, we have been freed from the penalty of sin. 
2. In Sanctification we are being freed from the power of sin. 
3. In Glorification we will be freed from the presence of sin. 
 
 16 
 
F. And the focus of v. 24 is this last stage. Glorification. When Christ 
returns, and he comes to finally and fully free us free from the 
presence of sin.  
1. Our body of death will be transformed to a glorified body. And in 
this new body, no sin will be found. 
2. We’ll be transferred from this broken world to a heavenly world, 
and no sin will be found there either.  
 
Philippians 3:20–21 (ESV)  
20
 But our citizenship is in heaven, and from it we await a Savior, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, 
21
 who will transform our lowly body to be like his 
glorious body. 
 
No more lowly body. No more body of death. Instead, a glorious body. 
Like Christ’s. All our members transformed, glorified, and used for 
perfect righteousness. 
 
1 John 3:2 (ESV)  
2
 Beloved, we are God’s children now, and what we will be has not yet 
appeared; but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, 
because we shall see him as he is.  
 
G. Christian, are you tired? Are you tired of the daily battle? Are you 
frustrated and discouraged with how often you lose? 
1. Take heart. One day the fight will end. Christ will come, and we 
will be de-sinned forever!  
2. There are no Rom. 7 Christians in heaven! Only perfect ones. 
Glorified ones. 
 
Charles Spurgeon said this: 
 17 
 
Sin is a monster and has immense vitality, but its back is broken! Its 
legs are broken! It is a broken-headed monster! There it is—it lies 
hissing, and spitting, and writhing, capable of doing us much 
mischief, but He who has wounded it will strike it again and again, 
until at last it shall utterly die! Thank God it has not vitality 
enough to get across the river Jordan; no sinful desire shall ever 
swim in that stream! 
 
H. I love that! 
1. Sin is a monster. But it is a broken-headed monster. Struck by the 
cross of Jesus Christ. It’s already been dealt the mortal blow. 
2. And when Christ comes again, He will finish the job. The Master 
will fully and finally slay the monster...so that the monster will lie 
dead, and not be able to follow us as we cross over the Jordan into 
the True Promise Land of Heaven.   
3. So what can we do? Besides what Paul did, simply cry out, 
“Thanks be to God!” 
 
I. Before we leave chapter 7, Paul has to bring us back to reality. He 
lifted us up on his shoulders and gave us a little sneak peek into 
Heaven, to breath it’s perfect air and glimpse our future perfect 
selves...but then at the end of v. 25, he takes us off his shoulders and 
brings us back down to earth...where the battle still rages on. 
 
So then, I myself serve the law of God with my mind, but with my 
flesh I serve the law of sin.  
 
1. This is essentially a summary of the whole section.  
2. The struggle with sin is persistent. The battle continues. 
a. And yet we’ve now gained a new hope by getting a little glimpse 
of the future: the fight will end. And it will end in victory. 18 
 
b. Jesus is coming back, he’s going to give you a perfect body, and 
he’s going to bring you to a perfect place. 
J. Doesn’t this change things? Doesn’t this give us energy for the fight? 
1. It’s disheartening to fight in a battle where you can’t see the end. 
2. It’s disheartening to run a race where you can’t see the end. 
a. But when you can see the finish line, your eyes light up, your 
heart leaps, and you kick those legs and power through. 
b. In battle, when you see the tide turning, when you see your 
soldiers gaining the upper hand, and when you can sense victory 
is just on the horizon, that’s when you gain new strength to fight. 